---
layout: page
title: "Consent"
category: getting-data
---

Informed consent is the mechanism through which people agree to provide information for research or data collection projects. Generally, consent has been understood as something that is given by individuals during direct interaction with researchers or surveyors, and is composed of three components:

* disclosure of research objectives and any risks or negative consequences of participating
*  capacity of individuals to understand the implications of participating
* voluntariness of their participation

**Fully informed consent** includes full disclosure of all potential risks and negative consequences of participation, and might not always be feasible or even possible. In some instances, it might be difficult for project staff to anticipate the way in which changing political or cultural contexts will influence risks for data subjects, and emergencies or pressing needs may in some cases justify data collection without the consent of data subjects. As a rule, however, projects which include data collection directly from data subjects should seek informed consent to the degree that is possible, especially in high risk contexts. Projects collecting data indirectly (through already existing data, or data scraping) will struggle to obtain informed consent of data subjects, but should consider these issues, and whether some form of mediated or simple consent is appropriate or possible.

Consent can be a highly technical and context-specific matter with many legal and regulatory implications. For example, consent in the context of academic research may be different from that in a healthcare context. Also take note that consent has a particular meaning in a legal context, which can vary across jurisdictions and across sectors (for a discussion of legal jursidictions and obligations, see the chapter in Managing Data).

This section is a high-level primer on how to think about consent when your project involves the collection, use and sharing of data. In that sense, it has a specific focus: it is not about consent to participate in the overall project to register for welfare benefits or receive medical attention, for example. It is about consent in relation to the use of the **data** that is provided as part of the overall development project.

A few words of caution:

* This section provides guidelines to help you think through the most common aspects of consent. It is **not a substitute for specific legal advice**. In order to comply with the legal regime applicable to a particular country, sector, type of data or category of person, you should talk to your legal or compliance team or specialist advisors.
* This section proceeds on the assumption that you have already thought through whether or not certain types of data should be collected at all, and have satisified yourself that you are able to safeguard what you do choose to collect. This section focuses on mechanisms to receive consent once you have already worked out whether, when and how to collect data.

##Elements of Consent

Explaining further the essential elements of consent as mentioned above:

* **Notice or Disclosure:** the consent process has to ensure that the participant must be informed of the nature and purpose of the research, the procedures to be used, the expected benefits (if any), reasonably foreseeable risks, possibilities of not participating and procedures for confidentiality and anonymity.
* **Capacity, or Understanding:** the information must be easily understood in that specific context (language, technical jargon) of the participant and they must be given the opportunity to have any of their questions answered.
* **Voluntariness:** the consent to participate must be voluntary, free of any coercion or inflated promise, and not involve people who have power over the participants. In the development context, it is difficult - if not impossible - to remove any power dynamics entirely, however.

Additionally responsible data implies that we also include the following vital elements of consent:

* **Competence:** The participant must be competent to give consent and not incapacitated due to mental status, disease, or emergency.
* **Form of Consent:** In every consent process, the participant must signal agreement to participation, preferably in writing.  In many cases written consent may not be appropriate and oral or implicit consent may do.  
* **Waiver of rights:** Consent should not compel the participant to waive any legal rights or releases from liability for negligence.

###What to disclose to participants/the data subject

Consent has traditionally been regulated as part of the ethical review mechanism for academic research, and there is no authoritative description of consent practices for civil society or development project data collection. Fully informed consent likely requires that projects disclose the following information to data subjects:

* **The nature and objectives of the project.**
This may include project history, partners and funders, as well as the specific objectives of the project and how those might change over time.
* **The purpose for which the data is being collected.**
How narrow or specific this needs to be might be dictated by the applicable legal regime, but in general, consent should be linked to a clearly identifiable purpose rather than a vague, "omnibus", open-ended one, however desirable the latter might be.  
* **How the data will be used**
This includes how the data will be used internally and publicly, and should also include how the data will and will not be shared, and any limits to use or the time for which data be stored.
* **What risks the data and its use might pose.**
This depends on the outcomes of the risk assessment and can never be exhaustive or authoritative. Disclosure will need to strike a balance between providing data subjects with the information they need to make a reasonably informed decsion about consent, and overloading data subjects with information that will have a negative effect on their engagement, and may itself present risks. For example, interviewees of the Belfast Project in the early 2000s were irresponsibly promised that the information they shared would not be accessible until after their death. They were not appropriately informed of the risk that this information could be accessed through legal channels. More information: http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/features/oral-history-where-next-after-the-belfast-project/2013679.article
* **What opportunities data subjects will have to review and influence the data** and its use over time, including opportunties to revoke consent.

###How to disclose information to the participant/data subject

In order for people to be meaningfully informed, disclosure needs to be communicated in a way that is culturally, technically and socially appropriate. It also needs to be conscious of political and media landscapes and the fact that project contexts change over time. This has implications for the types of information that disclosure includes, as well as the mechanisms for communication disclosure and whether this takes place in-person, or through other types of media. Try to think about the following questions to help guide yourself through these issues:

* Are the methods of disclosure appropriate for the subjects in terms of language, media, and social contexts? Have you thought about accessible methods of disclosure (media/literacy/etc.)?
* Are there mechanisms built in to understand how project contexts change, and what implications that has for consent?
* Will you need to disclose information more than once or on an ongoing basis?
* Are people seeking the consent adequately trained to do so? For example, can the staff manage issues of consent and power within interpersonal relationships, and can they answer common questions that participants might have?
* When the processes of providing consent or disclosing information are mediated by technology, it is important to note the ways in which specific platforms and media influence the experiences of individuals. Has this been factored in?
* If applicable, how can the quality and consent received reflect on participatory projects? What does resistance to granting consent say about project relationships with communities and data participants? Do consent receipts suggest anything about degrees of engagement or the participatory nature of a project?
* If you are not including a consent process in your project, explain why? Does this put subjects at risk?  
Participants may change their mind about consent at various times, due to changing context or circumstances, and there always needs to be a way to individually revoke their consent. Have you provided for this, and have you made it easy and accessible so that the method of revocation does not in itself prove a barrier to exit?

###Consent in a Digital World

Consent is fairly well understood in a traditional context. In a digital world that seems to offer infinite potential for information to be shared, adapted, manipulated and re-used, there is a need to recalibrate our view on the 'traditional' concept of consent. It is necessary to include and think about principled and practical challenges for anyone using digital and mobile tools to collect, manage and share data for social impact. Equally, if data is collected offline, or if there is a combination of online and offline data, there may be issues around merging data, and human data entry errors that may get replicated when copied onto digital formats, as well as other technical or practical concerns.

One of the most challenging areas in which to understand the necessity and the limits of informed consent is in regard to crowdsourced or user-generated data.

####Consent for Crowd Sourcing:

* Map potential risk areas for individuals/users in new and emerging crowd-sourced data technologies, information from which is used for advocacy
* Identify, share and develop resources for mitigating these risks between organisations or initiatives that use crowdsourcing.
* Develop Best Practices guidance for organisations using crowdsourcing technology for human rights research and campaigning.

###Developing a consent policy

To ensure that your project has an appropriate and realistic approach to consent, it is worth spending some time developing a general consent policy for your organisation or for a particular project. This will help with understanding the mechanisms of consent which are appropriate, and ensure that they are appropriately implemented. A consent policy should address the following components:

**Risk Assessment:** The level of consent and protection built-in will depend on the risk assessment, including an assessment of urgency and data sensitivity. This may include some sort of threat modelling, or broader sense of assessing risks that may flow from wrongful or erroneous use or sharing of the data.

**Disclosure:** On the basis of the risk assessment, determine how much information you need to disclose to participants or data subjects. Generally this should include any potential risks or negative consequences that may follow from data collection and data use. It should also include detailed information about how data will be used, including time and use limits, future disclosure and accountability, and sharing, as described below. Generally, there may be a tension between thorough disclosure and the willingness or ease for individuals to participate in data collection processes. This balance will need to be struck through a thoughtful conversation among project team members, ideally with the input of stakeholders and data subjects.

**Time and  Use Limits:** Setting limits for uses and for how long consent is valid will need to be balanced by limits broad enough to allow for unanticipated activities and limited resources; these need to be checked against potential risk. In particular, you may need to build in triggers or system alerts for when data gathered for one purpose is likely to be used for another purpose, bearing in mind that you might need to go back to the original consent giver to renew or refresh the consent.

**Transparency and Accountability:** This is about how data will be used and how you will ensure accountability for that use. How will information on actual use be shared over time. Will information be shared on specific instances of data use or data sharing? How often will this be updated? Will this information be posted on media that is accessible and appropriate for people reflected in the data? Depending on jurisdiction it may be important to carry out a legal assessment of applicable data protection regimes, administrative regimes or other restrictive legislation.

**Sharing:** How do people who are using the data check whether the use is in-line with what they consented to? When gathering data, there is often an assumption that action will be taken upon that data; from the perspective of the participant, otherwise, why collect it? Other people may make use of this data, either with the organisation’s consent or without, but it might not always be shared back with the participant. If people reflected in the data feel as though such uses are inappropriate or put them at risk, do they have mechanisms through which to raise these concerns?

###Implementing and maintaining a consent policy

The political and social contexts in which projects collect and maintain data rarely remain static. Regularly reviewing and implementing a consent policy over time is an important measure to ensure that it remains appropriate. It is also an excellent way to maintain engagement and input from data subjects, to forecast problems with data validity or support for data collection projects.

###Is Consent Broken?

A final word of caution: research increasingly finding indicates that consent has its limitations. For example, behavioural economics shows how easy it is to "nudge" people towards giving consent or choosing the riskier of options when faced when opt-ins or opt-outs.

Legal scholars such as Daniel Solove have talked of the limits of leaving users to regulate their own privacy and manage consents (in his words, *privacy self-management*). In his article, *Privacy Self-Management and the Consent Dilemma*, he describes how consent is flawed for many reasons: due to bounded rationality, people cannot possibly understand what they are consenting to and what possible uses their data might be put to in the future; they are often not given an opportunity to withdraw once consent is obtained upfront; they cannot comprehend the multiplicity of actors with whom their data may be shared; they lack visibility of who those data handlers are, which means that they cannot approach them to request that their data is deleted or not shared further.

Further, the impact of aggregation - when small pieces of data about them are combined with each other to form a more complete picture - cannot be appreciated upfront at the point of consent, and the societal benefits that accrue from safeguarding privacy and anonymity should be not be waived through consent. In Solove's words,

>*"Privacy self-management takes refuge in consent. It attempts to be neutral about substance — whether certain forms of collecting, using, or disclosing personal data are good or bad — and instead focuses on whether people consent to various privacy practices. Consent legitimizes nearly any form of collection, use, or disclosure of personal data. Although privacy self-management is certainly a laudable and necessary component of any regulatory regime, I contend that it is being tasked with doing work beyond its capabilities. Privacy self- management does not provide people with meaningful control over their data."*

This does not suggest that consent is not meaningful. It is, and should be sought by projects collecting or generating data on people or groups, especially in contexts of power imbalance. More often than not, consent may be the most responsible way to implement a project with the knowledge and buy-in of the intended participants or beneficiaries. Projects should be wary, however, of relying wholly on consent to legitimize any sort of practice or wide use of data without regard for the people behind it.

Further resources

* A checklist for evaluating policies on consent is available at https://docs.google.com/a/theengineroom.org/document/d/1PJxBAP1rFkjq9p7NuYcN_G5iomfCML-qiMTn5SPPHxE/edit.
* Solove, Daniel J., Privacy Self-Management and the Consent Dilemma (November 4, 2012). 126 Harvard Law Review 1880 (2013); GWU Legal Studies Research Paper No. 2012-141; GWU Law School Public Law Research Paper No. 2012-141. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2171018
* Launching an SMS code of conduct for Crisis Mapping: http://irevolution.net/2013/02/25/launching-sms-code-of-conduct/
